.\" bgpucap man page — BrightDate GPU/CPU/memory capture for Apple Silicon
.TH BGPUCAP 1 2026-05-30 "gpucap 0.1.3" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
bgpucap \- run a command and report GPU, CPU, and unified memory usage
.br
gpucap \- alias for \fBbgpucap\fR (Homebrew installs a symlink)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bgpucap
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.I COMMAND
[\fIARGS\fR...]
.PP
.B bgpucap
.B gpuexercise
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.PP
.B bgpucap
.B watch
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.PP
.B bgpucap
.B compare
.I FILE
.I FILE
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bgpucap
runs
.I COMMAND
with its arguments, polls system metrics while the child runs, then prints
average and peak GPU, CPU, and unified memory utilization to stderr.
Exit status matches the child process.
.PP
The crate is named \fBgpucap\fR; the CLI command is \fBbgpucap\fR.
The leading \fBb\fR is for \fBBright\fR, part of
.BR Bright Utils
(\(lahttps://brightutils.digitaldefiance.org\(ra),
alongside \fBbtime\fR, \fBbfind\fR, and \fBbping\fR.
.PP
Apple Silicon Macs only (M1/M2/M3/M4 and later, arm64).
Intel Macs and non-macOS platforms are not supported.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-format " " \fIFORMAT\fR
Print statistics using a
.I FORMAT
string (plain text specifiers, or
.B json
for structured JSON on stdout (human reports remain on stderr).
See
.B FORMAT SPECIFIERS
below.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-track\-gpu
Do not track per-process GPU usage (IORegistry), even when
.B cmd\-gpu
is sampled. Conflicts with
.BR \-\-pid .
.TP
.BR \-\-metrics " " \fILIST\fR
Comma-separated metrics for human or JSON output (default: all).
Run
.B \-\-list\-metrics
for names and groups (\fBbasic\fR, \fBpower\fR, \fBfreq\fR, …).
Env:
.BR BGPUCAP_METRICS .
.TP
.BR \-\-list\-metrics
Print metric names and groups, then exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-pid " " \fIPID\fR
Track GPU usage for process
.I PID
(IORegistry). Default: wrapped child when
.B cmd\-gpu
is sampled.
.TP
.BR \-\-separator " " \fITEXT\fR
Text between each average value and the word \fBpeak\fR in human output (default: space).
Env:
.BR BGPUCAP_SEPARATOR .
.TP
.BR \-\-columns
Align average and peak values in columns (human output).
.TP
.BR \-\-interval " " \fIMS\fR
Sampling interval in milliseconds (default: 100).
.TP
.BR \-\-color " [=" \fIWHEN\fR "]"
Colorize the default human report:
.BR auto ", " always ", " never ", " plain ", " ansi ", or " truecolor
(default:
.BR auto ).
Ignored when
.B \-\-format
is set.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-color
Disable color output.
.TP
.BR \-\-color\-scheme " " \fISCHEME\fR
Color palette:
.BR default " or " bright
(default:
.BR default ).
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version.
.SS gpuexercise subcommand
Generate sustained GPU load for testing via a Metal compute shader.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-percent " " \fIPCT\fR
Target GPU utilization 1-100 (default: 50).
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-seconds " " \fISEC\fR
Duration in seconds (default: 10).
.TP
.BR \-\-mode " " \fIMODE\fR
.BR best\-effort " (default), " load ", or " sample\c
\&. \fBbest-effort\fR skips load when target \(\leq\) ambient GPU;
\fBload\fR always generates Metal load;
\fBsample\fR measures ambient only.
.PP
Also accepts
.BR \-f ", " \-\-format "\c
\&, \fBjson\fR output,
.BR \-\-metrics "\c
\&, \fB\-\-list\-metrics\fR,
and the color and human formatting options above.
.SS watch subcommand
Sample GPU, CPU, and memory continuously until interrupted or
.BR \-\-count " " \fIN\fR
samples are collected (default interval: 1000 ms).
Live samples print to stderr (human) or stdout as NDJSON when
.BR \-f " " json\c
\& is set; the aggregated summary uses the same format on exit.
Accepts
.BR \-\-interval ", " \-\-metrics ", " \-\-pid ", " \-\-no\-track\-gpu\c
\&, and color options.
.SS compare subcommand
Compare average metrics from two
.BR \-f " " json
report files. Compares the common subset of metrics present in both files; metrics only in one report are skipped (noted on stderr). Prints a delta table to stdout.
.SH FORMAT SPECIFIERS
When
.B \-\-format
or
.B BGPUCAP_FORMAT
is set, output is always plain text.
Specifiers follow BrightDate
.BR btime \-f
conventions where applicable.
.PP
Full reference:
.RS
https://github.com/Digital-Defiance/brightdate-rust/blob/main/FORMAT-SPEC.md
.RE
.TP
.B %gA \fR/\fB %gP
GPU average / peak percent (one decimal, no % suffix).
.TP
.B %uA \fR/\fB %uP
CPU average / peak percent (system-wide).
.TP
.B %hA \fR/\fB %hP
Unified memory average / peak percent.
.TP
.B %gI \fR/\fB %gJ
GPU unified memory in use (bytes) avg / peak.
.TP
.B %gM \fR/\fB %gO
GPU memory allocated (bytes) avg / peak.
.TP
.B %gR \fR/\fB %gS
Renderer utilization percent avg / peak.
.TP
.B %gL \fR/\fB %gY
Tiler utilization percent avg / peak.
.TP
.B %gF \fR/\fB %gV
GPU frequency MHz avg / peak.
.TP
.B %gU \fR/\fB %gW
GPU temperature °C avg / peak.
.TP
.B %gT
Thermal throttle percent (share of samples throttled).
.TP
.B %uF \fR/\fB %uV
CPU frequency MHz avg / peak (blended E/P cores).
.TP
.B %gB \fR/\fB %gK
GPU power watts avg / peak.
.TP
.B %gC \fR/\fB %gD
Wrapped command GPU percent avg / peak (IORegistry \fIaccumulatedGPUTime\fR).
.TP
.B %gN \fR/\fB %gQ
GPU SRAM power watts avg / peak.
.TP
.B %uE \fR/\fB %uQ
E-core CPU frequency MHz avg / peak.
.TP
.B %uH \fR/\fB %uZ
P-core CPU frequency MHz avg / peak.
.TP
.B %uB \fR/\fB %uK
CPU package power watts avg / peak.
.TP
.B %uG \fR/\fB %uR
E-core cluster power watts avg / peak (\fIEACC_CPU\fR).
.TP
.B %uI \fR/\fB %uS
P-core cluster power watts avg / peak (sum of \fIPACC*_CPU\fR).
.TP
.B %aB \fR/\fB %aK
Apple Neural Engine power watts avg / peak.
.TP
.B %hG \fR/\fB %hJ
DRAM power watts avg / peak.
.TP
.B %hW \fR/\fB %hX
Wired memory bytes avg / peak.
.TP
.B %hC \fR/\fB %hD
Compressed memory bytes avg / peak.
.TP
.B %hS \fR/\fB %hO
Swap used bytes avg / peak.
.TP
.B %hK \fR/\fB %hL
Memory pressure level avg / peak (0 normal, 1 warn, 2 critical).
.TP
.B %tG
Exercise target GPU percent (\fBgpuexercise\fR only).
.TP
.B %e \fR/\fB %E \fR/\fB %B \fR/\fB %b \fR/\fB %dE
Elapsed time (seconds, h:mm:ss, BrightDate days, millidays).
.TP
.B %Ws \fR/\fB %N
Command start BrightDate (9 decimal places, days since J2000.0).
.TP
.B %Wt \fR/\fB %n
Command end BrightDate.
.TP
.B %C
Command line.
.TP
.B %x
Child exit status.
.PP
Default machine format (ends with a newline):
.RS
%gA,%gP,%uA,%uP,%hA,%hP,%e,%Ws,%Wt
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B BGPUCAP_FORMAT
Format string (same as
.BR \-f ;
.B GPUCAP_FORMAT
still accepted).
.TP
.B BGPUCAP_METRICS
Comma-separated metric filter (same as
.BR \-\-metrics ).
.TP
.B BGPUCAP_SEPARATOR
Text between average value and \fBpeak\fR in human output (same as
.BR \-\-separator ).
.TP
.B BGPUCAP_COLOR \fR/\fB BGPUCAP_COLOR_SCHEME
Color settings (\fBGPUCAP_*\fR still accepted).
.TP
.B NO_COLOR \fR/\fB CLICOLOR \fR/\fB CLICOLOR_FORCE
Standard color control variables.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns the exit status of
.I COMMAND
on normal termination, or 126/127 if the command could not be executed.
.SH EXAMPLES
Wrap a command (colored report on TTY):
.RS
.EX
bgpucap ffmpeg -i in.mp4 out.mp4
.EE
.RE
.PP
Machine-readable CSV with BrightDate timestamps:
.RS
.EX
bgpucap -f '%gA,%gP,%uA,%uP,%hA,%hP,%e,%Ws,%Wt' sleep 1
.EE
.RE
.PP
GPU exerciser at 50% for 10 seconds:
.RS
.EX
bgpucap gpuexercise --percent 50 --seconds 10
.EE
.RE
.PP
JSON report to a file, then compare before/after:
.RS
.EX
bgpucap -f json --metrics basic sleep 5 > before.json
bgpucap -f json --metrics basic sleep 5 > after.json
bgpucap compare before.json after.json
.EE
.RE
.PP
Continuous sampling (Ctrl+C to stop):
.RS
.EX
bgpucap watch --interval 1000
bgpucap watch -f json -n 20
.EE
.RE
.SH METRICS
Extended metrics are validated on Apple M4 Max only (project test hardware).
Other Apple Silicon chips (\fBm1\fR/\fBm2\fR/\fBm3\fR/\fBm4\fR family detected from brand string) report best-effort values with a footnote when not validated.
Use \fB\-\-metrics basic\fR to skip extended IOReport subscriptions for lower overhead.
.TP
Per-process GPU %
IORegistry \fIaccumulatedGPUTime\fR via \fB\-\-pid\fR or wrapped child (\fBcmd\-gpu\fR / \fBgpu\-pid\fR in human output).
.TP
GPU %
IOKit \fIDevice Utilization %\fR (IOReport GPUPH fallback).
.TP
GPU memory
IOKit \fIIn use system memory\fR / \fIAlloc system memory\fR.
.TP
GPU frequency
IOReport GPUPH residency weighted by pmgr \fIvoltage-states9\fR.
.TP
GPU temperature
IOReport GPU die sensors (\fITg*a Max\fR).
.TP
GPU throttle
IOReport \fIGPU_CLTM\fR thermal throttling residency.
.TP
GPU / CPU / DRAM power
IOReport Energy Model (\fIGPU Energy\fR, \fICPU Energy\fR, \fIDRAM\fR); channel units (nJ vs mJ) converted to watts.
.TP
ANE power
IOReport Energy Model (\fIANE\fR cluster total or \fIANE0\fR shards).
.TP
E-core / P-core power
IOReport \fIEACC_CPU\fR / \fIECPU\fR and \fIPACC*_CPU\fR / \fIPCPU\fR cluster counters.
.TP
CPU %
Mach \fIhost_processor_info\fR (system-wide).
.TP
CPU frequency
IOReport PCPU/ECPU + pmgr DVFS tables.
.TP
Memory
Unified RAM via \fIhost_statistics64\fR and \fIhw.memsize\fR; wired, compressed, swap, and \fIvm.memory_pressure\fR.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR btime (1),
.BR time (1),
.BR bfind (1)
.PP
Bright Utils: https://brightutils.digitaldefiance.org
.br
Project: https://github.com/Digital-Defiance/gpucap
.br
Docs: https://digital-defiance.github.io/gpucap/
.SH AUTHORS
Digital Defiance.
.SH COPYRIGHT
MIT License.
